**Living Manifesto**

Source: Anjan Katta: The Wild Man  
Scribe: 

*By choosing to read this manifesto, you enter into a spiritual pact of confidentiality, committing to safeguard these words in your heart until they can be disclosed publicly, if ever. This manifesto is meant to be wild, presenting wild ideas, and it aims to rewild us, returning us to the source of our innate wholeness. May these words live with you and manifest through you.*

1. We are in a foolish relationship with technology.   
2. One of the reasons for this foolishness is “evolutionary mismatch.”  
3. Evolutionary mismatch occurs when behaviors that helped our ancestors adapt to their environments become maladaptive in our modern environments. This mismatch happens because the rate of technological change has far outpaced biological evolution, leading to a disharmony between our evolved predispositions and the demands of modern life.   
4. As a result, traits once advantageous for survival in our primal settings can become detrimental, contributing to individual and collective suffering.   
5. Examples of evolutionary mismatch include overeating due to food delivery apps, obesity from fast food abundance, compulsive sexual behavior linked to easy access to pornography, societal polarization fueled by social media algorithms promoting culture war content, and disrupted sleep cycles caused by blue lights from screens.   
6. If evolutionary mismatch continues unabated, we will suffer in body, mind, and spirit.   
7. This manifesto aims to resolve our evolutionary mismatch, bringing us into a wiser relationship with technology.   
8. Manifestos are what philosophers call “performative utterances,” words that not only describe present reality but shape the reality they describe. Manifestos are philosophical spells, manifesting one of the many timelines before us.   
9. Two technologically themed manifestos have indirectly addressed evolutionary mismatch: “Industrial Society and Its Future” by Ted Kaczynski and “The Techno-Optimist Manifesto” by Marc Andreessen. Each manifesto attempts to cast a spell upon us, endeavoring to manifest the preferred timeline of its scribe.  
10. Kaczynski published his manifesto in 1995, the year the Internet was privatized, which marked the beginning of the Information Age. He anticipated future scenarios characterized by unresolved evolutionary mismatch and proposed a radical solution to prevent them.  
11. In the first scenario, what Kaczynski calls “the machines” completely replace human capacities in all domains, and humanity becomes increasingly reliant on the machines, handing over their agency to them. In the second scenario, humans maintain control over the machines, but this control is within the grasp of a ruling elite. Given human work is becoming increasingly obsolete, the masses are no longer needed and are considered a liability, which offers the elite a choice: eliminate the surplus population or make them docile and subservient.  
12. To avoid these futures, Kaczynski advocates for embracing nature, which he views as the opposite of technology and the industrial-technological society that drives its expansion. He suggests the way to address evolutionary mismatch is to collapse the industrial-technological society. Although this “**Collapse Timeline**” would lead to tremendous suffering, Kaczynski argues that it is preferable to the techno-hellish possibilities in front of us.   
13. The Collapse Timeline is his proposed solution to end our evolutionary mismatch. Kaczynski’s fundamental mistake is believing that the only way to stop evolutionary mismatch is to encourage collapse. This belief is false.   
14. Andreessen published his manifesto in 2023 amidst escalating worries about artificial general intelligence. Unlike Kaczynski, Andreessen contends that it is our birthright to control nature. He firmly advocates for the industrial-technological society, or what philosopher Nick Land calls the “techno-capital machine,” considering it humanity’s most effective problem solver.  
15. Andreessen elevates technology to a deity-like status, treating its advancement and the resulting enhancement of intelligence as our highest virtue, asserting that it can solve any problem. While he fails to mention the problem of evolutionary mismatch, presumably, he believes that the explosion of intelligence will be able to solve it. The fundamental mistake Andreessen makes is believing that increasing intelligence will mean increasing wisdom. This belief is false.  
16. Advocating for the acceleration of technology, based on a foundation of evolutionary mismatch, will only perpetuate foolishness despite any enhancements in intelligence, leading to increased risks of individual and collective suffering.  
17. Given the current trajectory of technology towards highly immersive virtual reality environments and screens becoming ever closer to our bodies, devices will eventually be implanted in us. If the evolutionary mismatch remains unresolved, future technologies will intensify disembodied, dissociative, and dehumanizing conditions. As technology becomes more integrated into our bodies, with accelerating technological advancement, we metaphorically (or literally) head toward the “**Grey Alien Timeline**.”  
18. Inspired by the work of biological anthropologist Michael Masters, the numerous reports of extraterrestrial encounters with “grey aliens” are interpreted not as beings from another planet but as evolved versions of humans visiting us from the future. Masters argues that their distinctive features—big eyes, large heads, and small bodies—result from evolutionary trends like increased brain size and bodily “neoteny” (juvenilization), which is influenced by technological augmentation. These changes will be evident in the ongoing trend of integrating computers into our bodies and living in increasingly artificial environments.  
19. Masters suggests that the prevalence of sexual encounters in reports of extraterrestrial visits is attributed to a fertility crisis in the future. These future beings are compelled to time travel to the past to obtain fertile seed from humans. Whether this is true or woo, it serves as a grim imagination for a humanity that chooses accelerated technological advances without addressing evolutionary mismatch.  
20. Kaczynski’s response to evolutionary mismatch is to halt technological progress through the Collapse Timeline, while Andreessen’s response is to accelerate technological advancement inadvertently toward a Grey Alien Timeline. Both responses are foolish.   
21. Choosing a future that avoids both the Collapse and the Grey Alien timelines is possible.   
22. There is an alternative timeline we can choose to manifest. The future we are choosing can be termed the “**Solarpunk Timeline**.” This designation is not necessarily an endorsement of Solarpunk philosophies or politics but rather an appreciation for the aesthetic imaginaries they envision.  
23. In the Solarpunk Timeline, screens exist outside our bodies, encouraging us to be fully present within our bodies, connected with nature, and engaged in harmonious creation with the whole. Instead of being immersed in our screens and increasingly digitizing our lives, we will be exposed to reality, returning to more analog ways of being. Rather than being unconsciously obsessed with our content, we can consciously attend to it.  
24. As the Solarpunk Timeline unfurls, we will witness lush urban gardens, regenerative energy sources, and eco-conscious living. These images will not be mere science fiction but rather a vibrant reality in which we all live, where nature and technology are not considered fundamental opposites but coexist in a harmonious relationship.  
25. We can find a synthesis between Kaczynski’s thesis and Andreessen’s antithesis, combining their central values: nature and technology. If the Solarpunk Timeline is to manifest, we need a value to unite these two. We propose “wholeness.”   
26. Wholeness is the existential position of being in a relationship with the whole of reality, which includes being in a harmonious relationship with nature and technology.  
27. The open secret is we are already inherently whole, blossoming into an even greater state of wholeness, like a whole seed evolving into a whole flower. The falsehood pervading our present era is the belief that we are incomplete, inadequate, and lacking in some fundamental way, with the naive promise that a technological solution is just around the corner.  
28. Evolutionary mismatch occurs when our environments change too rapidly, disorienting us from the whole. If this disorientation persists, we may forget that we are already whole, being part of a greater wholeness. Remembering our wholeness is the proper response to evolutionary mismatch; embodying it will bring forward its opposite: “evolutionary harmony.”  
29. Evolutionary harmony unites the body, mind, and spirit. It moves us toward the good, the true, and the beautiful—the transcendentals that form the ontological building blocks of our reality. New technologies will be created with the whole, evolving in harmony with what was, what is, and what will be.  
30. Evolutionary harmony is one of the reasons why we have a wise relationship with technology.

*A wild man sourced this manifesto, and his spiritual brother scribed it. It is not meant to be a thorough description of present reality or a strategic roadmap toward a new future. These words will evolve, transforming with the individuals who choose to read them. Consider this manifesto a whole seed, planted with one wise premise: our innate wholeness. Together, we will rediscover this wholeness, creating technologies in harmony with nature.*

Influences: Ted Kaczynski, Marc Andreessen, Michael Masters, Daniel Schmachtenberger, Steve March, gPeter Jones, and Bonnitta Roy.